Now to conclude this course section,
I want to dive in another important data-related topic
and that would be dependency caching.
If you take a look at the workflows I ran here,
you will notice that they all took around a minute
to execute.
Sometimes a bit faster, sometimes a bit slower,
but always around a minute.
Now, it took around a minute here
because these were all relatively simple jobs
in these workflows, but, of course,
I have three jobs running after each other.
So therefore, since they're not running in parallel,
it's the sum of the jobs
that's taken to complete the workflow,
plus additional setup and cleanup work
that is done by GitHub Actions.
Now, running the jobs in parallel wouldn't be an option here
because indeed these jobs depend on each other
and that will often be the case.
Nonetheless, if we take a look
at the workflow definition file,
you will notice that there are some steps
that are always repeated.
For example, getting the code
and installing the dependencies.
Now, getting the code is something we simply have to do
in every job because, as you learned,
every job runs on its own runner, its own separate machine,
so therefore we have to get the code again
and again every time.
But this is also relatively fast
and shouldn't be a huge issue.
If we take a look at our jobs here,
we see that getting the code only takes around one second,
so that's not really too slow.
What is slower is the installation of dependencies.
It takes 12 seconds here in the build job,
in the test job it took eight seconds here
in this workflow run.
So if we take a look at all the steps,
we see that installing the dependencies
is actually the step that takes the longest.
So if we would be able to kind of shorten this step,
if we could reduce the duration it takes
to install the dependencies,
we could save a lot of time
for the overall workflow execution.
And even though we're not paying for it
here in the free plan,
reducing the overall workflow duration
might still be something you aim for,
because ultimately it would also mean
that your website gets deployed faster.
And, of course, if you are paying for your workflows,
then you have an even stronger incentive
to reduce the amount of time your workflow execution takes.
Now, no matter what you're doing,
if you're building a website or other kinds of apps,
it's pretty common that you have some step
like the dependency installation step we have at here.
Very often you must install third party dependencies
or run some setup scripts that generate some files.
This is pretty common for most CI/CD workflows.
And a great way of speeding up
that installation process for those dependencies
is to cache those dependencies.
Because if you got two workflows that do different things
but have this shared step of installing dependencies,
which tends to take a bit longer
and which produces files that are needed
by the other steps in the jobs,
if you have something like this, then it makes sense
to only install those dependencies once in one job
and then cache them so that other jobs
can reuse those cached dependencies.
Because those dependencies typically don't change frequently
and therefore you can save time if you do cache them
so that the cached dependencies can be reused thereafter
instead of being downloaded again,
which is the part that takes rather long.
And it's not just caching across different jobs
that matters here, you can actually also cache dependencies
or files and folders in general across workflow executions,
because if you have certain files and folders
that don't change at all across different workflows,
it makes sense to cache them across different workflows
so that they don't have to be re-downloaded
or recreated all the time.
And this is such a common scenario
that GitHub Actions has an official action
that helps with caching files and folders
across jobs and workflows.
And it's this cache action which we're going to use now.